~~ miRanda: micro RNA target detection web interface ~~
Kristen Niekamp
AS.410.712.81.SP22: Advanced Practical Computer Concepts for Bioinformatics

Webpage: http://bfx3.aap.jhu.edu/kniekam1/NiekampK_FinalProject/miranda.html
Webpage must be accessed while on JHU network/VPN.

This is a web interface for the miRanda miRNA target detection algorithm, which
is currently available only as a command line program. It also makes use of
Biocode's validate_fasta.py program to validate FASTA format in input files.

miRanda local download: http://cbio.mskcc.org/miRNA2003/miranda.html.
miRanda manpage: http://cbio.mskcc.org/microrna_data/manual.html

**Note: miRanda must be installed in the same directory as run_miranda.cgi**

Usage:
To use the web interface, simply upload a FASTA-formatted file of miRNA
sequences as the query and a FASTa-formatted file of genomic DNA sequences as
the reference sequences. File sizes are currently limited to 100MB. The user may 
adjust parameters if so desired, but default parameters will suffice for most 
queries.The server will perform file validation and run the files through the
miRanda algorithm. The results will appear as a table at the bottom of the page.
Results are also stored in a MySQL database for later reference if needed.

Example input files are located in the "examples" directory.

Required Python packages: 
cgi; json; subprocess

miRanda:
Enright AJ, John B, Gaul U, Tuschl T, Sander C, and Marks DS. 2003. MicroRNA
targets in Drosophila. Genome Biology 5(1):R1


    The idea for this project came from the current lack of accessibility of many
bioinformatics tools for researchers who are not trained in computer usage like
command line practices or coding. In my undergraduate research, before I discovered
my love for bioinformatics, I struggled immensely with having no training in
using the command line and needing to be able to use certain tools in genomics
research. Needing to use my university's high performance computer lead me to
learning Linux command line usage, which uncovered the huge part of my field
that I was missing out on. Making new tools and preexisting tools available for
the average biology researcher is a passion of mine and this course gave me the
skillset to be able to bring those visions to life for the first time.
    miRNA target detection is important when considering the different
effectors of variable gene expression. Even after a gene is transcribed, miRNAs
can bind to the mRNA and mark it for degradation before ever being translated 
into a protein. As more miRNAs are discovered, it's necessary to identify what
gene they regulate and where exactly on the molecule they bind. miRNA target
prediction is not the most robust or efficient method for identifying gene 
targets of novel miRNA, as other, more high-throughput methods exist. However,
miRNA target prediction is still a very viable method when those high-throughput
biological approaches are unavailable.
    Most miRNa target prediction algorithms make use of a seed-and-extend method
to identify potential target sites. miRanda makes use of a two-step method for 
each query-reference pair. Step 1 performs dynamic programming pairwise 
alignment for maximum complementarity against the reference sequence. After
alignment, alignments with scores above the minimum score threshold have the 
thermodynamic stability of the RNA duplexes calculated. Step 2 generates a
fictional miRNA-target mRNA molecule with its structure estimated using the 
RNAlib library. The minimum free energy of the structure is calculated and 
structures with free energy below the maximum free energy threshold are
returned as potential target sites.
    Included in the tarball is an "examples" directory with example input files
to use with the webpage. The data was collected from miRDB and miRBase. Each set
of files will output a short table that was used for troubleshooting and quickly
testing new functionalities of the webpage. The total score and total energy 
values are sums of the multiple positions where the miRNA sequence aligned to
the reference sequence with a high enough score and low enough energy to pass
the set thresholds. 
    This project allowed me to piece together knowledge I have about individual
languages, concepts, and implementations into one tool that can benefit the 
biological research community. Moving forward, I hope to add the ability to
download results from the table and find a way to avoid writing the input file
contents to new files before running the program. Additionally, I would like to
create web interfaces for more command-line tools to increase access for the
biological research community.
